New best practice guide for clone (#4542)
fishtown-analytics/docs.getdbt.com: website/docs/best-practices/clone-incremental-models.md

---
title: "Clone incremental models as the first step of your CI job"
id: "clone-incremental-models"
description: Learn how to define clone incremental models as the first step of your CI job.
displayText: Clone incremental models as the first step of your CI job
hoverSnippet: Learn how to clone incremental models for CI jobs.
---

Before you begin, you must be aware of a few conditions:

> - `dbt clone` is only available with dbt version 1.6 and newer. Refer to our [upgrade guide](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud) for help enabling newer versions in dbt Cloud

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `dbt clone` is only available with dbt version 1.6 and newer. Refer to our [upgrade guide](/docs/dbt-versions/upgrade-core-in-cloud) for help enabling newer versions in dbt Cloud
```

Author: Oh I can't believe I missed all of those. Thanks @mirnawong1

- This strategy only works for warehouse that support zero copy cloning (otherwise `dbt clone` will just create pointer views).
- Some teams may want to test that their incremental models run in both incremental mode and full-refresh mode.

> Imagine you've created a [Slim CI job](/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/cloud-enabling-continuous-integration#slim-ci) in dbt Cloud and it is configured to: 

Reviewer: @matthewshaver i think we use ci now but we do reference slim ci so might be good to double check which is the right term to use?
```suggestion
Imagine you've created a [Slim CI job](/docs/deploy/continuous-integration) in dbt Cloud and it is configured to: 
```

> Imagine you've created a [Slim CI job](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/cloud-enabling-continuous-integration#slim-ci) in dbt Cloud and it is configured to: 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Imagine you've created a [Slim CI job](/docs/dbt-cloud/using-dbt-cloud/cloud-enabling-continuous-integration#slim-ci) in dbt Cloud and it is configured to: 
```

- Defer to your production environment.
- Run the command `dbt build --select state:modified+` to run and test all of the models you've modified and their downstream dependencies.
- Trigger whenever a developer on your team opens a PR against the main branch.

> <Lightbox src="/img/best-practices/slim-ci-job.png" title="Example of a slim CI job with the above configurations" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/best-practices/slim-ci-job.png" width="70%" title="Example of a slim CI job with the above configurations" />
```

Now imagine your dbt project looks something like this in the DAG:

> <Lightbox src="/img/best-practices/dag-example.png" title="Sample project DAG" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/best-practices/dag-example.png" width="70%" title="Sample project DAG" />
```

When you open a pull request (PR) that modifies `dim_wizards`, your CI job will kickoff and build _only the modified models and their downstream dependencies_ (in this case, `dim_wizards` and `fct_orders`) into a temporary schema that's unique to your PR. 

> This build mimics the behavior of what will happen once the PR is merged into the main branch (so you have confidence that you're not introducing breaking changes) without requiring a build of your entire dbt project. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This build mimics the behavior of what will happen once the PR is merged into the main branch. It ensures you're not introducing breaking changes, without needing to build your entire dbt project. 
```

## What happens when one of the modified models (or one of their downstream dependencies) is an incremental model?

> Because your CI job is building modified models into a PR-specific schema, on the first execution of `dbt build --select state:modified+`, the modified incremental model will be built in its entirety _because it does not yet exist in the PR-specific schema_ and [is_incremental will be false](/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#understanding-the-is_incremental-macro). You're running in `full-refresh` mode.

Author: ```suggestion
Because your CI job is building modified models into a PR-specific schema, on the first execution of `dbt build --select state:modified+`, the modified incremental model will be built in its entirety _because it does not yet exist in the PR-specific schema_ and [is_incremental will be false](/docs/build/incremental-models#understanding-the-is_incremental-macro). You're running in `full-refresh` mode.
```

> Because your CI job is building modified models into a PR-specific schema, on the first execution of `dbt build --select state:modified+`, the modified incremental model will be built in its entirety _because it does not yet exist in the PR-specific schema_ and [is_incremental will be false](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#understanding-the-is_incremental-macro). You're running in `full-refresh` mode.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because your CI job is building modified models into a PR-specific schema, on the first execution of `dbt build --select state:modified+`, the modified incremental model will be built in its entirety _because it does not yet exist in the PR-specific schema_ and [is_incremental will be false](/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#understanding-the-is_incremental-macro). You're running in `full-refresh` mode.
```

This can be suboptimal because:
- Typically incremental models are your largest datasets, so they take a long time to build in their entirety which can slow down development time and incur high warehouse costs.

> - There are situations where a `full-refresh` of the incremental model passes successfully in your CI job but an _incremental_ build of that same table in prod would fail when the PR is merged into main (think schema drift where [on_schema_change](/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) config is set to `fail`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are situations where a `full-refresh` of the incremental model passes successfully in your CI job but an _incremental_ build of that same table in prod would fail when the PR is merged into main (think schema drift where [on_schema_change](/docs/build/incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) config is set to `fail`)
```

> - There are situations where a `full-refresh` of the incremental model passes successfully in your CI job but an _incremental_ build of that same table in prod would fail when the PR is merged into main (think schema drift where [on_schema_change](/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) config is set to `fail`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are situations where a `full-refresh` of the incremental model passes successfully in your CI job but an _incremental_ build of that same table in prod would fail when the PR is merged into main (think schema drift where [on_schema_change](/docs/build/incremental-models#understanding-the-is_incremental-macro) config is set to `fail`)
```

> - There are situations where a `full-refresh` of the incremental model passes successfully in your CI job but an _incremental_ build of that same table in prod would fail when the PR is merged into main (think schema drift where [on_schema_change](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) config is set to `fail`)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- There are situations where a `full-refresh` of the incremental model passes successfully in your CI job but an _incremental_ build of that same table in prod would fail when the PR is merged into main (think schema drift where [on_schema_change](/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) config is set to `fail`)
```

You can alleviate these problems by zero copy cloning the relevant, pre-exisitng incremental models into your PR-specific schema as the first step of the CI job using the `dbt clone` command. This way, the incremental models already exist in the PR-specific schema when you first execute the command `dbt build --select state:modified+` so the `is_incremental` flag will be `true`. 

You'll have two commands for your dbt Cloud CI check to execute:

> 1. Clone all of the pre-existing incremental models that have been modified or are downstream of another model that has been modified: `dbt clone --select state:modified+,config.materialized:incremental,state:old`

Reviewer: i suggest adding the command in the next line so users can copy it more easily
```suggestion
1. Clone all of the pre-existing incremental models that have been modified or are downstream of another model that has been modified: 

```sql
dbt clone --select state:modified+,config.materialized:incremental,state:old
```
```

Author: Same as the other - it's not a code example per se, we're just referencing the statement that's doing the action

> 2. Build all of the models that have been modified and their downstream dependencies: `dbt build --select state:modified+`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Build all of the models that have been modified and their downstream dependencies: 

```sql
dbt build --select state:modified+
```

```

Author: I don't think we need to do this for just a sample line. We're referencing the line that's doing the deed rather than presenting a code example

Because of your first clone step, the incremental models selected in your `dbt build` on the second step will run in incremental mode.

> <Lightbox src="/img/best-practices/clone-command.png" title="Clone command in the CI config" />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Lightbox src="/img/best-practices/clone-command.png" width="70%" title="Clone command in the CI config" />
```

Your CI jobs will run faster, and you're more accurately mimicking the behavior of what will happen once the PR has been merged into main. 

## Additional help

> **Relevant `dbt clone` Slack thread:** https://dbt-labs.slack.com/archives/C05FWBP9X1U/p1692830261651829

Reviewer 2: This is an internal slack thread and would not be relevant to readers, this was just on the issue to add more color to what content we should include - we should cut this

> ### From the "Better CI for better data quality" coalesce talk

Reviewer 2: Do we feel like this chunk adds any value? If it's just repetitive, happy to cut it!

> ## Additional help

Reviewer: i suggest turning these h3's + the slack link into tabs so it's nicer to scan through

Author: These are different statements and opinions, I'm not sure the tab format would be the best way to present this kind of information

Reviewer: fair, i found it confusing to read or scan, especially since the slack thread was bolded and not linked as mentioned in the style guide, and the rest of the opinions were h3s.

"If you use the incremental materialization in your dbt project, you should consider cloning your relevant, pre-existing incremental models into your PR-specific schema as the first step of your CI check. This will force your second step to run in incremental mode (where is_incremental is true) because now the models already exist in your PR-specific schema (via cloning). This is beneficial because it more accurately mimics what will happen when you merge your changes into production and it will save time and money by not rebuilding your incremental models (which are often large data sets) from scratch for every PR that modifies them." -Grace Goheen, dbt Labs Product Manager

> ### Expansion on "think schema drift" where [on_schema_change](https://docs.getdbt.com/docs/building-a-dbt-project/building-models/configuring-incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) config is set to `fail`" from above

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Expansion on "think schema drift" where [on_schema_change](/docs/build/incremental-models#what-if-the-columns-of-my-incremental-model-change) config is set to `fail`" from above
```
